the whole reason that I create content
because I I know we don't know each
other well so you don't know this about
me but what I'm actually trying to do is
build a studio a film studio film and TV
okay uh because I believe that the way
to impact people is to make the next
Kung Fu Panda or The Next Star Wars
something that has a message at its core
but entertains people hits them at
olymic level it's an emotional
connection probably going to have to
focus on youth that bums me out because
um while I really enjoy that and I've
always wanted that to be a part of it I
don't want to give up on adults which is
if you know Jeffrey Canada is very much
his advice um but hitting people at an
impressionable moment in their life
whether that's youth or they're just
open with something that resonates
emotionally that is uh able to incept
them with a portal I'm very much using
your language on that I would normally
think of it as as growth mindset or
whatever but you're incepting them in a
moment with a portal that causes their
their portals are more violent then I
love it because I love that kind of [__]
so let's use violent language so I'm in
fact know that anytime in the future
since I'm going to adopt the word portal
uh that it just comes with a TM and your
name so I'm I'm certainly not trying to
to rip it off but I will help popularize
it they belong to us all and I I think
that that's you know really important to
me is that the portal story like the
Matrix
um is a universal and if you think about
it Neo just to see how well I remember
the film um you know Neo is kind of
searching for something he's leading
this underground Lifestyle by night and
he's sort of pieced together that
there's a something and this is what
brings Trinity into his life where
Trinity um is going to go out and contct
him and let him know that if he follows
the White Rabbit uh with an obvious
homage to Lewis Carroll so it's the
portal story within a portal story and
you know he goes into this uh Australian
SNM club uh which is very funny um that
this is his introduction to a world in
which Morpheus is going to take him
through the Looking Glass and that scene
of waking up you know uh in a completely
different context I think is it is the
violence of the portal I love that um
Neil Strauss called me out one time he
said all your [__] language is
violent like what is that about but
creation is an act of violence oh can I
pretend that that's exactly why I do it
I don't know why I do it but that feels
so wonderful well you have to break
something right and you know if you
think about how we come into this world
uh our our mother's water breaks and
that is a moment in which that's a
[__] portal right and literally this
is something that I find mind-blowing in
the Jewish
tradition um Passover is about the
escape from Egypt which whose name is
mitzraim which is a plural masculine
plural and it's the narrow places and it
is the literal birth story of the Jewish
people out of Egypt do you think there
are some people that just get I I have a
hypothesis that goes like this some
people think in archetypal metaphor I'm
not one of those people and it actually
has I think held me back as a writer
I've had to really like learn that or do
you think that it is um some people
dream in archetypes which is another
reason that I think that or is it that
just over these stories that we think of
now as archetype are are told sort of
bit by bit by bit and and shaped over
time based on what gets a reaction you
need you know uh the simple mind have
devils and angels on their
shoulders um One Step Up from that you
have Sam Harris and Jordan Peterson
whispering in opposite
ears and you need to camp and DeCamp
between the hyper rational now of course
I've been unfair to them both Jordan is
a scientist and Sam is a pretty
spiritual guy but their archetypes um
Sam is constantly reminding us for the
need uh of the need for rationality and
that spiritualism can be grounded in
rational and Jordan is really reminding
us that if you don't actually just let
that Spirit free that your mind has the
spiritual capacity built into it um yeah
there's there's danger on either side if
you're too rational or too spiritual and
too moved by the
archetype uh in both directions uh lies
nonsense but that tension is is magical
have you read The
Watchmen the by Michael Moore the comic
the Graphics yeah yeah so there's a part
in there if you remember the book is
broken into you've got the main story
and then you have Snippets from like a
book uh somebody's Journal a diary that
kind of thing and one of the Snippets in
there this hit me so [__] hard was a
guy had written a book on orthology and
he said you know the problem with
orthology was just a study of birds the
problem with orthology is that we know
the size of the feathers we know the
orientation of the feet and we can tell
you you know the gap between the
feathers and you know down to the
millimeter and what it all means and all
that he said but we've lost the Poetry
of flight and we've lost the sense of
awe that a bird could Inspire that made
it such a symbol that we would put it on
coins or on temples and he said I never
want to get to that point where I'm so
blinded by the science that I lose sight
of the awe and I was like [__] like that
gave me the chills I was like that is so
true and that like so I love Sam and
Jordan I think they're both
extraordinary minds but your notion of
being able to camp and DeCamp I think is
so important the ability to bounce back
and forth talk a little bit about that
and how you see that playing out today
in particular where people are camping
but nobody's
decamping well it's very interesting
people sometimes accuse me of um having
it both ways or middle of the road
nothing could be further from the truth
people get annoyed with that well they
they have the idea that you're you know
pick a side man why well because it's
pure because there's mush in the middle
from from their perspective and what I
view is wow you imagine that these two
sides have been Waring let's say for
thousands of years or hundreds of years
or even decades and it's not because
both you know both sides probably have a
point it's just not there's no synthesis
of that dialectic so you have these
these sides yelling at each other and I
always think if two sides have been
nailing at each other with smart people
on both sides for a long
time that's my cue that they're not they
haven't found a frame outside of flat
land they're trapped they have not found
the portal and so what I start doing is
I I invite them both into my mind
initially in a sandbox you know can I
represent the other person's arguments
so they would say yeah man that's
exactly what I'm saying all right can I
do that for for both sides are there
multiple sides Beyond two and so once
you sort of have all of these things
playing in your
head then you start saying okay I'm
going to make an Outreach from one sand
sandbox to the other what if I'm
convinced that there is no God but that
religion is super valuable what does
that feel like or I'm convinced that
there's absolutely a God but that it
leads us into madness with um people
making claims that can't be
substantiated and we have to rever them
right whatever these things are so once
you start doing that that's why for
example years ago on the Tim Ferris
program I talked about using coilia you
just use a string of swear words to let
your brain know we're not in Kansas
anymore this is not safe space we're
working blue it's after hours it's time
to get creative it's time to get violent
and you have to be decent about it
that's like you know comedians if you go
to a you know I was just catching a set
at the comedy club at The Comedy Store
and that's pretty pretty brutal but on
the other hand it's happening in a room
everybody's there voluntarily and in
general you know it's there's a limit to
how bad it's going to get and so these
kind of rough spaces that aren't safe
spaces are are important if we're going
to be generative and you know my belief
is is that we all have to recognize that
the pure states are to be
avoided or rather that you have to
embrace multiple pure States because
purity of one particular kind or another
is where Madness comes from we have to
not uh we have to welcome the infection
man as you were talking like I was
getting the chills that to me that
notion
of being in what you're calling the
sandbox of being able to
um steal man the argument was it your
brother that came up with that phrase or
did he just bring it to the I think I
brought it to the wider world but it
came out of the sort of East Bay
rationality Community at least that's
where I found it so I love the the
concept of Steel Manning I think that's
so important of I think ideologically
people have to believe it is their
obligation to Steel Man somebody instead
of trying to um tear them down like to
First understand right to um and I say
that selfishly like one of the things I
don't understand is when you and I think
this is what you mean when you say that
the madness happens in the Purity I
think more from a biological perspective
that once the crop is completely
homogeneous it is [__] at risk like
one thing goes wrong and the entire crop
is lost right one well even worse
imagine somebody uh who's eukaryotic
decides that they're infect infected
with their own
mitochondria like you know then the
thing that's powering every cell in your
body which was initially probably a
procaryotic infection uh it becomes
something you you need to rid yourself
of okay well in the process you're going
to just you know you're going to go
totally OCD it's like somebody told you
hey there's a quarter in your new
leather couch go get it you know and
there's no quarter there and you're just
going to rip the thing to shreds
yeah so getting people to um as as a
selfish driver to put themselves in a
position where they're constantly trying
to understand what the other person is
coming from so that they can adopt uh
anything that works right so Bruce Lee
said take what works discard what
doesn't add your own so having that
anybody whose primary goal is
self-development and yes we have the
guitar anybody whose primary goal is
self-development I think has to have as
a part of their operating system system
a desire to um first listen hear what
might be usable even if you think that
that's a rival Camp take on what works
discard what doesn't and then find a way
to leverage that so that you can do
things in the world and my obsession is
getting people to understand and this is
one of my portals um and this is the
path I was going down
earlier the reason that I'm so
interested in this particular portal
that I'm going to outline is it it will
change your life forever so it's on one
side of the portal you think that you
are made a certain way and that is that
and life is about making the most of the
gifts you were given or weren't or you
know making the most of a bad situation
however you want to look at it on the
other side of that violent Act of
Creation of stepping through that portal
or being kicked through or whatever you
realize that you can change your
perception and the perception will
change your beliefs which will change
your behaviors which will change your
outcome and the outcome of course is
where I'm obsessed so the portal I'm
trying to cram people through
is realizing that oh I'm viewing the
world from a fixed mindset to use Carol
D's um famous book uh mindset and I can
have a growth mindset so in one I
believe my talent and intelligence are
fixed traits in the other I believe
they're malleable traits and once I
believe they're malleable traits then I
can get into my grand Obsession which is
getting people to understand that skills
have utility so since we have a guitar
here this may be the perfect um
explanation that guitar that very guitar
that you're about to play out has gotten
me laid many times now that's a real
outcome because I wrote songs for my
then girlfriend and she was moved by it
it was it was a full recognition of her
psychology and what made her feel good
and made us feel connected and made her
feel sexual and because I could make her
feel sexual then I got to have the
experience that I wanted to have and
also I wanted to connect and I wanted to
convey something to her and I wanted to
create the shared lexicon that you were
talking about you know we could adopt
the the Indian Cannon or the East Asian
can what the Canon like we were building
a cannon together and it was like to be
able to reference a song that I had
written for I mean it just like it began
to shape our lives together but that
started with my dumbass having to learn
how to play a G chord A C chord A D
chord right but those skills have
youtility they let me do something and
so the thing that freaks me the [__] out
about people you're leaning back now
about uh about people that um they they
get lost in what you call the purity
they're stuck in their idea they're not
looking to steal man the other argument
they just want to know how they're right
is skills have [__] utility like if
you learn something from that person
you're going to be able to do something
you weren't able to do that thing right
there is based on an
impurity the guitar which is even
tempered you going to break it out while
you explain all
right so I don't know whether your mics
can pick this up it'll probably pick it
up barely
I'll narate for anybody at home who's
watching and he will pick back up where
he left off uh he is pulling out the
guitar um and we're going to learn how
the guitar itself is born of impurity
I'm excited to hear the answer to this
I'm not sure that I can predict
it I think there might be one more than
you would imagine that thing always uh
surprised me with just how many latches
it has you want to help out show me
there we go there it
is all right like I said I make no
promises about uh the tuning well even
if we have just one string we can
probably figure out
something all right so first what's the
impurity this is based on
well so if you break the string into
three pieces so this would be your E
string but if I place my finger exactly
at the the midpoint will double the
frequency and if I place it a third of
the way through it should be giving me
three times the
frequency now that number of three times
the
[Music]
frequency is not actually the even
tempered version of three times the
frequency what do you mean even tempered
well we have 12 Frets in an octave okay
those have been specifically geared by
the person who made the guitar to break
that
12 uh break that octave which is a
doubling of the frequency into 12
exactly equal steps okay if you do 12
exactly equal steps then you will never
reach exactly three times the frequency
as you go up an octave which is 12 and
then seven more half steps which is 19
steps in total that's as close as you
can get so it's the difference
between and that sounds almost the
[Music]
same but there's actually a tiny
discrepancy and that's why we choose the
number 12 because only for 12 do we get
that tiny discrepancy and have a
reasonable number of steps in the octave
the equation if you're trying at home is
2 to the 19 12ths is almost equal to
three but is slightly below okay that
inur well I'm telling okay that impurity
is the basis for Western Harmony that's
the
great thing that the West did that
nobody else did because without that
what would happen um without that you'd
just have the
[Music]
pure so for example but I couldn't
harmonize with that it seems like I
could well if you had those as the exact
steps you you'd notice that you couldn't
switch Keys you couldn't modulate to
other Keys very easily so you've taken a
there's a crime in our fretboard and
you've taken the body and you've chopped
it up into 12 equal pieces and that
disguises the fact that our third uh
that our fifth in even temperament and
our fifth in physics which is the
Pythagorean fifth are not the same note
but they're so close that our ear can't
tell the differ I wasn't sure what I was
going to do at this moment in the
podcast I knew it would come where
you're saying a whole lot of words and I
don't understand how they add up I
understand each individual word but
strung together in the way that you're
stringing them together I can only nod
in
smile is there another way to explain
this cuz I here here was my hypothesis
with music that you understand math so
well that to you it is self-evident that
a guitar is math and to me it is not and
I experien a guitar entirely
experientially so whatever portal exists
between the experience of music and the
math of music I desperately want to cram
myself through because I think it'd be
[__] amazing to understand that to no
no no I don't want to understand it I
want to feel it I want to I want to
understand at a body level okay and I
don't know if my mind is I don't like to
have a fixed mindset so I'm very open to
I just haven't had the key Insight
that's going to invite me through the
portal but it feels like the thing I
don't understand is math and that there
is a key insight to be had in math that
until I have that key Insight in math
your sentences will continue to sound
cool like when you talk it almost sounds
like poetry but I don't understand it
okay well the first thing you have to
know is that there are certain things
that are encoded in physics okay that
sound to us as if they were are composed
or like music and if I understand them
they're going to make playing the guitar
easier because I I want people to
understand what the punch line is if we
fight through and I figure I'm going to
just play harmonics that would occur if
we strung a cat gut between two
trees uh in Borneo okay okay
[Music]
do you recognize that uh yes I couldn't
tell you what it is if you played it
again it's I'm trying to do the lick
from Pretty Woman oh then definitely not
like by Roy orbit she walking back to
me so those notes are encoded into the
vibrating into the forier series of the
vibrating string okay so the point was
that I don't think that whoever wrote
that song that Roy Orbison made famous I
don't think that song is composed so
much as discovered it really just came
out of uh expanding a series of
vibrations for the wave equation of the
of of the vibrating string but because
of because of that right there's certain
things that people will say are cultural
like right
so oh from The Wizard of Oz are wise men
say right that alternation has to do
with the natural modes of a vibrating
string so all of our all over the world
people
hear as a natural tone right okay that's
just it just has to do with the fact
that your your vo your vocal chords or
any one-dimensional medium like a flute
or a string is going to have those
things as part of it but why does that
matter like to average person unless
this is going to help me get laid right
skills have utility unless this is going
to boil down to something that I can
functionally get something that I desire
you want to do that so let's let's take
the coffee you seem disappointed well no
is it is it that the math of this is
fascinating and beautiful to you are we
like in that moment where I want the
science and you want the awe you want
something I want to give you whatever it
is that you want and then I want to come
back all right so for example if I take
the second third and fourth
string and I play those that is a major
chord if the guitar is tuned to standard
tuning okay right now I'm going to
ignore the two strings closest to my
head and the one closest to the
floor right and I have the coffee mug so
assume that somebody has a guitar around
the house and it's in standard tuning so
now I
go
now I don't have to learn how to fret a
G chord or a c chord or all the things
that hurt my hand I'm just I got my claw
around the
mug
[Music]
right so I can start
immediately playing songs or I'll admit
that was [__] cool okay the next
thing is is is that because the hard
[__] just for people listening forgive
us since you can't see what's going on
but it the the part of learning the
guitar that is infinitely harder is the
Fring like using your fingers which
hurts in the beginning and you're
probably going to bleed and you have to
build these insane calluses and yeah I I
went to my guitar teacher and I said you
know what I'm I just don't think my
hands are built for this cuz I could not
do a bar chord to save my life so to see
you use a mug that effectively is right
so I'm throwing away most of the or half
of the guitar strings one five and six
and now I
this is going to be like a really bad
version of the Four Chord song MH but go
to YouTube put in the Four Chord song
look at the Axis of Awesome with all of
their songs so here's the here's the key
thing in the four chords
song three of the four chords are just
strings 2 three and five with the mug at
different positions along the
fretboard 12 7 and five these
Frets okay the only thing that you have
to throw in is that there's a minor
chord which is strings one two and three
Place played at the 12th fret position
now this will be a lousy version of the
Four Chord song but the key point is if
it comes to you in under two minutes
that you can now play all of the songs
in the Four Chord song badly with a
coffee mug and a guitar that somebody
else tuned then you're through a portal
so for example if you think let's try
Beast of Burden which is it's going to
be the wrong voicings so the musicians
will object to it
so
[Music]
I'll never be your Beast of Burden now
that's not a great version of the song
but for two minutes and you think you're
musically hopeless it's not too bad
we're talking about Mike einiger right y
this genius musician everybody thinks is
an amazing guy what's even better about
him is that he's a very generous teacher
he's a good friend great Kai how the
hell did you meet
him the network man as soon as you break
out you meet all these amazing people
when I followed the rules I didn't meet
anybody that's interesting that that's a
conversation worth having but finish
this thought and then so the thought I
was going to have is is that if you
think about that song that he wrote for
more or less for aichi that took over
the world I realize he wrote a song for
aichi didn't he do this um wake me up
when it's all over maybe I have no idea
wiser and I'm older wow I had no idea
that was him that's so it's like it's
the same four chords but he starts from
the minor chord in the in the cycle so
if you put them around it's like six
minor
so feeling my way through the
[Music]
darkness it's that cycle now my point is
that those are things that once you
learn the coffee mug trick mhm you think
okay I completely Miss A assessed how
difficult this was now was the coffee
mug trick is that the portal or did you
come to realize everything that you just
said from first principles read music
and I couldn't understand what was being
said to me when people tried to teach me
music the standard way so I had to find
my own way if you like that clip check
out the full powerful episode here and
I'll see you
there